DevOps 100 Days Challenge-Day 17 : PostgreSQL Setup for Nautilus Application

D
As part of Day 17 of the KodeCloud DevOps Challenge, our task was to prepare the PostgreSQL database environment for a newly developed Nautilus application.
The application requires a dedicated database and user to store and manage its data.

In this article, I will explain step-by-step how I completed the task, including commands, their purpose, and why these steps are important in real-time scenarios.

Task Requirements
The requirements shared by the Nautilus application team were:

Create a database user: kodekloud_top with password GyQkFRVNr3.

Create a database: kodekloud_db8.

Grant full privileges of the database to the new user.

Do not restart PostgreSQL service.

Infrastructure details (Database server):

Server	IP	User	Purpose
stdb01	172.16.239.10	peter	Nautilus DB Server
Step 1: Connect to the Database Server
First, we need to connect to the DB server via SSH:

ssh peter@stdb01.stratos.xfusioncorp.com
SSH (Secure Shell) allows secure access to remote servers.

On the first connection, the server fingerprint is verified, and the host is added to known hosts.

Step 2: Switch to the PostgreSQL Admin User
PostgreSQL runs under its own Linux user postgres. Only this user can manage databases and users.


sudo -i -u postgres
sudo = run a command as admin.

-i = open a login shell.

-u postgres = switch to the PostgreSQL system user.

Step 3: Open PostgreSQL CLI

psql
psql = PostgreSQL command-line interface.

Prompt changes to postgres=#, indicating you are now inside PostgreSQL.

Step 4: Create a Database User

CREATE USER kodekloud_top WITH PASSWORD 'GyQkFRVNr3';
Creates a new database user kodekloud_top with the specified password.
Check user creation:

\du
\du lists all database roles/users.
Why:

Each application should have its own user for security and isolation.

This prevents apps from accessing other databases unintentionally.

Step 5: Create a Database

CREATE DATABASE kodekloud_db8;
Check database creation:

\l
\l lists all databases.
Why:

Applications need dedicated databases to store their data safely.

Here, kodekloud_db8 will store all data for the new Nautilus app.

Step 6: Grant Privileges to the User

GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON DATABASE kodekloud_db8 TO kodekloud_top;
Grants full access to the user on the database.

User can create tables, insert, update, and delete data.

Optional Test:
Log in as the new user to verify:

psql -U kodekloud_top -d kodekloud_db8 -h localhost
If login succeeds, the user has proper access.
Why:

Without privileges, the user cannot use the database.

Granting proper privileges ensures the app works seamlessly.

Step 7: Exit PostgreSQL CLI and Linux User

\q   # Exit PostgreSQL CLI
exit  # Exit postgres user back to peter
Safely closes your session.

Key Takeaways
We created a dedicated database user and database for the app.

Proper privileges were assigned for secure and isolated access.

No service restart was required; changes are applied immediately.

This is a standard DevOps practice before deploying any application that depends on a database.

✅ Conclusion
Day 17 focused on database preparation, a critical step in the DevOps workflow. Setting up a dedicated PostgreSQL user and database ensures the application can operate securely and efficiently.

Following these steps is essential for real-time deployments in production environments.

Tomorrow I’ll tackle the next task — stay tuned! 🙌

Blog Link : https://infinitryout.hashnode.dev/devops-100-days-challenge-day-17-postgresql-setup-for-nautilus-application
